Another way a back-test could benefit from hindsight and hence be an illusion,
is if the modelers have statistically over fit the training data,
and or failed to observe good statistical practices concerning testing sets.
Typically, when statistical models are used,
there's a training set,
a validation set, and a test set.
Or in certain statistical procedures such as cross-validation,
the same data set is used to generate
multiple training sets and validation sets by re-sampling.
But in such cases, proper statistical practice,
dictates that there must still be a test set,
which is only examined after all modeling choices have been made and the model is fixed.
If the model's performance on this test set is poor,
you should discard the strategy.
We have already discussed basic principles of statistical over fitting in prior lessons.
If you want to read a more detailed discussion of this topic and related procedures,
check out the book, Elements of Statistical Learning,
which is available for free online as a PDF.
Certain statistical machine learning methods are more proned over fitting than others,
and it is important to understand the differences
among them if one is using those techniques.
Without a test set,
it is impossible to guess the models generalization performance.
That is, its accuracy on data that it hasn't seen yet.
Live trading strategies are always being run on data they haven't seen yet,
the real-time data of the world.
So, the only thing that matters is generalization performance.
If the model are repeatedly tweaks the model,
examines the test set performance,
and then tweaks again,
only accepting those model tweaks which seemed to improve performance on the test set,
then this represents a research process which is fundamentally broken.
The test set in such cases can no longer be used to
generate an estimate of the models through generalization performance.
In which case, there is no estimate of generalization performance.